Earnings models are the tools of the trade for most of the analysts on both sell side and buy side. Research Analysts create spreadsheet models for the companies they are following to project income for the next few quarters and use them to estimate the values and target stock prices. There are two main inputs to the earning model: current financial statements and revenue/cost drivers. The process is necessarily manual because both inputs require human expertise. Financial statements are not machine readable before XBRL. So analysts need to read the documents and extract necessary information or relay on third party databases. Revenue and cost drivers are analyst’s subjective estimates on revenue growth and costs and therefore require industry knowledge.  These are typically estimated from trends in historical data in financial statements couple with outside information such as earnings call.
Because the modeling is manual and takes lot of effort, each analyst can only cover a few stocks.  That means only a small fraction of the companies have research coverage.  Most of the mid to small cap companies are without any coverage at all. Using machine readable XBRL statements, we aim to automate first input to the modeling process and take significant portion of the laborious manual work out of the process. This will help analyst focus on the part that really require his or her expertise and knowledge. This will improve analyst productivity and expands universe of companies with research coverage. Also by providing generic industry templates, rigorous model based analysis can be made accessible to non-professional retail investors.