Demx Application Overview

= Introduction =

Earnings models are the tools of the trade for most of the analysts on both sell side and buy side. Research Analysts create spreadsheet models for the companies they are following to project income for the next few quarters and use them to estimate the target stock prices. There are two main inputs to the earning model: current financial statements and revenue/cost drivers. The process is necessarily manual because both inputs require human expertise. Financial statements are not machine readable before XBRL. So analysts need to read the documents and extract necessary information or relay on third party databases. Revenue and cost drivers are analyst’s subjective estimates on revenue growth and costs and therefore require industry knowledge.  These are typically estimated from trends in historical data in financial statements coupled with outside information such as earnings call.
 
Because the modeling process is manual and takes lot of effort, each analyst can only cover a few stocks.  That means only a small fraction of the companies have research coverage.  Most of the mid to small cap companies are without any coverage at all. Using machine readable XBRL statements, we aim to automate first input to the modeling process and take significant portion of the laborious manual work out of the process. This will help analyst focus on the part that really require his or her expertise and knowledge. This will improve analyst productivity and expands universe of companies with research coverage. Also by providing generic industry templates, rigorous model based analysis can be made accessible to non-professional retail investors.  


= Details =

 
<h2>How the application works?<h2>

The application is a small program that investors/analysts can download and run on their PC. Only requirement is to have XBRL statements available in a directory on that PC. It includes a utility to help with downloading or scheduling a regular download of the statements for the companies they are interested in from SEC website. 

Typical session:
 
·         User opens a command prompt
 
·         Runs the application with company ticker and output directory. Application generates the valuation spreadsheet in the specified dierctory
 
·         User opens the generated valuation model in the output directory and continue further analysis by modifying the drivers and run what if analysis
 
Generated spreadsheet model uses Revenue Growth, Gross Margin, Operating Expenses as a percentage of revenue and tax rate as drivers and provide analysis for all the quarters that XBRL data is available. It also estimates the drivers from historical trends and estimates the income for next four quarters.  This brings new level of insight for non-professional investors new to financial modeling.
 
  System Generated Income Model:


 
Advanced Modeling 

Model generation is driven by a fully configurable excel template. Template mirrors the current process that analysts use and modifying it does not require any programming knowledge. Users can build their own template and provide it as an argument while running the program. Application will generate valuation model based on the provided template instead using the default one 

Here is the default template used to produce standard valuation model:
 
 
 
Template separates current/historical from future/forecast. Driver values are calculated during the current phase and then used to generate the model values in forecast part. Analysts can add any number of model or driver elements. They build the model for one quarter in the same way they do now and then provide mapping to tie the element to XBRL tags. Application will generate the full spreadsheet model for each quarter by combining the data from XBRL statements and the relationships specified as formulas.
 
Since templates are pluggable components, we envision separate market for industry specific or company specific templates.  Sophisticated users with industry and financial modeling expertise can build these excel templates and make them available for investors. This excel based flexible template framework will allow users to build models using any XBRL element in XBRL Taxonomy.  We believe it has potential to bring currently unused detail data in financial statements into wider use.
 
Future Enhancements/Possibilities
 
·         Web interface to specify the company to generate the valuation model and download it through browser. Also provide ability to manage templates over the web interface.
 
·         Use an xml based database such as Mark Logic to manage XBRL statements and templates
 
·         Build it as a service over internet/web with ability for users to manage and share their templates with other users. Manage a central database of all XBRL statements.
 
·         Ability to alert if a model element value exceeds specified threshold after applying newly available XBRL statement. For example, send alert if the difference between Cash Flow from Operations and Net Income exceeds specified percentage of revenue. This might indicate aggressive accounting requiring further analysis of revenue recognition practices. 